kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,0,MINISTRY OF HEALTH KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 Towards attainment of the highest standards of mental health Copyright: Any part of this document may be freely reviewed, quoted, reproduced or translated in full or in part, provided the source is acknowledged. It may not be sold or used for commercial purposes. Kenya Mental Health Action Plan 2021 – 2025 Published by: Ministry of Health Afya House, Cathedral Road PO Box 30016 Nairobi 00100 http://www.health.go.ke TABLE OF CONTENTS: FOREWORD: ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 6 ACKNOWLEDGEMENT: . ........................................................................................................................................................................ 7 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: ........................................................................................................................................................................ 8 CHAPTER 1: BACKGROUND .............................................................................................................................................................. 11 CHAPTER 2: SITUATIONAL ANALYSIS ............................................................................................................................................ 13 CHAPTER 3: STRATEGIC FOCUS ........................................................................................................................................................ 21 CHAPTER 4: INVESTMENT AREAS AND RESOURCES MOBILIZATION ..................................................................................... 32 CHAPTER 5: MULTI SECTORAL COORDINATION, MONITORING AND EVALUATION ........................................................... 38 ANNEX 1: Strategic Actions towards strengthening Leadership and Governance for Mental Health ............................................... 53 ANNEX 2: Strategic Actions towards Promotive and Preventive Mental Health ................................................................................ 56 ANNEX 3: Strategic Actions on Access to comprehensive Mental Healthcare Services at all Levels; .............................................. 59 ANNEX 4: Strategic Actions on the strengthening of mental health systems:
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,1,.................................................................................... 62 ANNEX 5: Costing of Kenya Mental Health Action Plan 2021-2025 ................................................................................................ 68 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 3 ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS: AIDS Acquired Immune Defi ciency Syndrome CBO Community Based Organization CNS Central Nervous System DSM 5 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders DALYs Disability- Adjusted Life Years FBO Faith Based Organization HIS Health Information System HIV Human Immunodefi ciency Virus ICD - 11 International Classifi cations of Diseases -11 ICT Information and Communication Technology KNCHR Kenya National Commission on Human Rights MHA Mental Health Act (1989) MHIS Mental Health Information System MNS Mental, Neurological and Substance use NGO Non-Governmental Organization 4 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 NHIF National Hospital Insurance Fund PWID People Who Inject Drugs PWUD People Who Use Drugs PPP Public-Private-Partnership STIs Sexually Transmitted Infections SUD Substance Use Disorders UNODC United Nations Offi ce on Drugs and Crime UHC Universal Health Coverage W.H.O World Health Organization KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 5 FOREWORD: Mental health is a key tripartite component of health in accordance to
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,2,the World health Organization (WHO) defi nition of Health as a state of physical, mental and social wellbeing, and not just mere absence of infi rmity. Further, WHO defi nes mental health as a state of wellbeing in which individuals realize his or her own potential/abilities, can cope with the normal stresses of life, can work productively and fruitfully and is able to contribute to his or her community. Mental health is a key determinant to the overall health and socio-economic development. It infl uences a variety of outcomes for individuals and communities such as healthier lifestyles; better physical health; improved recovery from illness; fewer limitations in daily living; higher education attainment; greater productivity, employment and earnings; better family relationships; social cohesion and engagement and improved quality of life (WHO Global Mental Health Action Plan 2013-2020). Mental illnesses are largely due to interplay and pathways of multiple factors including; biological, psychological, social and environmental. The resultant mental health conditions contribute to individuals, families and communities increased healthcare costs, socioeconomic losses, marginalization and other forms of vulnerability. The Kenya Mental Health
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,3,Policy (2015-2030) envisions a Nation where mental health is valued and promoted, mental health conditions are prevented and persons affected by mental health conditions are treated without stigmatization and discrimination. The mental health policy gives a roadmap for securing reforms and building strong mental health systems with ultimate goal of attaining the highest standard of mental health in Kenya. This Action plan will operationalize mental health policy’s four main objectives: to strengthen effective leadership and governance for mental health; ensure access to comprehensive, integrated and high-quality mental health care services at all levels of healthcare; to implement promotive and preventive mental health strategies and strengthen mental health systems. There is overwhelming evidence on the returns on investment in mental health. Lancet study in 2016 found benefi t returns to the ratio of 1:5 for the overall health and economic benefi ts. I call upon all stakeholders to commit and invest in these mental health strategic actions to address mental health disparities for a healthy nation and socioeconomic development. Sen. Hon. Mutahi Kagwe, EGH Cabinet Secretary, Ministry of Health 6 KENYA
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,4,MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 ACKNOWLEDGEMENT: The Kenya Mental Health Action Plan 2021-2025 was developed through a consultative process of key health stakeholders whose inputs contributed signifi cantly in a variety of ways towards its planning and development. Foremost, we acknowledge the Cabinet Secretary for Health whose leadership and guidance ensured that all the necessary resources and technical inputs were provided for effective planning and development of the Action Plan. We thank the technical team headed by the Director for Mental Health under the leadership of the Director General for Health and support from all Heads of Directorates in the Ministry of Health. We would like to thank the Council of Governors, who through the secretariat supported and gave signifi cant inputs to the development of the plan. The contributions from Ministries, State Departments and Agencies bring the multisectoral approach and commitment to partnership and collaboration. Special thanks to the Division of Mental Health and the technical working group, who spearheaded the whole exercise. We acknowledge the World Health Organization (WHO) for technical and fi nancial support toward
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,5,the development of the action plan. Last but not least, acknowledgement goes to; the Taskforce on Mental Health, Non-Governmental Organizations, Users Organizations, Mental Health Professional Associations and all other persons whose effort, contributions and support made it possible to have the Action Plan. We take this opportunity to call upon all the stakeholders and partners for future engagements with the goal of implementing the action plan by the year 2025. Your investment and collaboration in this regard will be of paramount importance in realizing this goal. Susan N. Mochache, CBS Principal Secretary, Ministry of Health KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 7 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: The Mental Health Action Plan (2021-2025) will provide a framework for both National and County Governments and stakeholders to implement the Mental Health Policy through strategic objectives with specified priority targets and indicators. It will also guide the implementation of recommendations by the Taskforce on Mental Health with strategic actions and investments to bring transformative reforms in the following broad key areas; 1. Policy and Legal reforms. 2. Reforms to improve access to quality
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,6,mental health services. 3. Financial reforms and investments. 4. Cross sectoral mental health reforms. 5. Administrative Actions. Strategic Objective and Priority Actions: 1. Mental Health Leadership and Governance: • Strengthen mental health governance with an objective of improving oversight and national coordination on mental health • Establishment of an independent Mental Health Board or equivalent Governance institution (Mental Health Commission/Authority) through legislation. • Strengthen the operation of the board as stipulated in the Mental Health legislation. • County mental health leadership and governance structures through establishment of County Mental health Councils and Mental health coordination units. • Review and Amend the Mental health Act 1989 to establish County mental health councils. • Appointment of County mental health Focal Persons. • County Mental health plans and Budget allocation. • Mainstreaming Mental Health across Sectors (Social services, Education, Justice, Youth and Sport etc.); • Establish and operationalize counselling and wellness units in all Government ministries, state departments and agencies to address mental health and wellbeing. 8 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 2. Preventive and Promotive Mental Health: • Establish
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,7,multi sectoral promotion and prevention programs on mental health at National and County levels. Community promotive and preventive programs (Risks reduction and build protection/resilience through life, social o and family skills training). Promote mental health friendly communities and spaces. o Implement suicide prevention program. o Implement substance use prevention and harm reduction programs. o Mental health promotive and preventive interventions through community, School and workplace programs. o • Mental health literacy and Stigma reduction. Public education campaign through media, mental health ambassadors, religious groups, sport and art. o Mental health and wellness program at workplace. o Mental health literacy through inclusion and training of mental health modules in school and colleges curricula. o 3. Access to Quality Mental Health Services: • Services reorganization and expanded coverage towards WHO recommended optimal mix of services; Integrate mental healthcare services at primary care and community level through cascaded training of community o health volunteers (CHVs) and primary care providers. Establishment of functional referral County mental health units in all the Counties. o Strengthening existing mental health units to offer Substance use disorders treatment
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,8,and rehabilitation services o Mainstreaming mental health services in already existing health care programs (HIV/AIDs, maternal and child o health, NCD etc.), through mental health skills training for psychosocial staff and other health workers in those programs. Establish peers support groups and community care coordination network. o • Implementation of Quality Rights mental health standards and guidelines. • Establish integrated person-centred mental health clinics in County and primary care health facilities. KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 9 4. Strengthening of Mental Health Systems: • Mental healthcare fi nancing in line with the Universal Health Coverage (UHC) agenda. Coverage of comprehensive mental health services under the UHC Health benefi t package. o Ensure mental health parity through provision by parliament and County Assemblies of fi nancial resources (mental health fund) o to address the mental health disparities and establish community mental health programs. • Mental health workforce; Incremental training and recruitment of mental health workers to the norms and standards for human resources in health. Establish training courses in mental health for; nurses, clinical offi cers, occupational therapists,
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,9,medical social workers, counsellors o and psychologists in ALL Kenya Medical Training Colleges (KMTC) in the Country. Prioritize and increase scholarships for mental health professionals training at County and National level. o Training programs for primary care providers and community health units. o Revise training curricula in medical colleges to include human rights and disability as it relates to mental health. o • Infrastructural development for mental health to the National and County health facilities; Establish comprehensive county mental health services at National and County health facilities. o Establish and integrate Substance use disorders prevention, treatment and rehabilitation centres integrated within the healthcare o system Infrastructural development of community based mental health services with psychosocial support units. o Restructuring and improvement of Mathari hospital to a National specialized referral hospital and institute of mental health with o affi liated six regional training and specialized services referral centres. • Health information system and research; monitoring and evaluation framework to strengthen mental health data management and promote research o National survey to establish disease burden and resource gaps, Revising mental health indicators
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,10,and enhance reporting through health information system o Partnership and collaboration to strengthen the capacity in mental health research o • Access to cost effective essential medicines and supply of equipment and technologies; The Kenya Medical Supply Agency (KEMSA) to stock all psychotropic medicines (varieties of fi rst and second generation) in the o Kenya Essential Medicine List (KEML). Ring fence budgets for specifi ed essential psychotropic medicines and equipment kit for the different levels of care. o Dr. Patrick Amoth, EBS Ag. Director General for Health 10 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 CHAPTER 1: BACKGROUND Mental Health is defined as a state of wellbeing in which individual realizes her or his own potential/abilities, can cope with the normal stresses of life, can work productively and fruitfully and is able to contribute to her or his community (WHO Definition). Mental health is a key determinant of overall health and socio-economic development. It influences a variety of outcomes for individuals and communities such as healthier lifestyles; better physical health; improved recovery from illness; fewer limitations in daily living;
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,11,higher education attainment; greater productivity, employment and earnings; better family relationships; social cohesion and engagement and improved quality of life. Mental health conditions are due to multiple factors which impact people mental health leading to higher rates of disability and mortality as well as barriers to full participation and inclusion in the community. Mental health conditions also directly and/or indirectly increase risk factors for other diseases such as diabetes, cardiovascular disease, injuries etc. and vice-versa. All these factors in turn lead to increased healthcare costs, socioeconomic losses, marginalization and other vulnerability for individual, families and communities. Mental health conditions are common affecting one in four people at some point in their lives. In other words, every family is likely to be affected. Stigma and discrimination are a major barrier to the improvement of mental health and wellbeing of the population, it contributes to human rights violations of people with mental and psychosocial disabilities, and inadequate investment in mental health acts as a barrier to their inclusion in the community. Kenya is experiencing a rapid increase in suicides, mental health conditions,
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,12,substance use and addictive disorders of an epidemic proportion, an indication of social challenges and unmet needs at societal level. It is estimated that 50% of all mental disorders start by the age of 14 years and 75% by the age of 24 years. In addition, stigma and discrimination contributes to and perpetuates mental ill health and marginalizes persons with mental health conditions, psychosocial, intellectual and cognitive disabilities. The COVID-19 pandemic has caused enormous significant health, socioeconomic and psychological impacts on the population, hence mental health and psychosocial support strategies and measures are critical in the short-term and long-term responses. KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 11 Policy Environment: Kenya Mental Health Policy 2015-2030; The policy provides for a framework on interventions for securing mental health systems reforms and strengthening in Kenya. This is in line with the Constitution of Kenya 2010, Vision 2030, the Kenya Health Policy (2014-2030), realization of Universal Health Care and the Global commitments such as the Global Mental Health Action Plan (2013-2030 and Convention for the Rights of Persons with Disability (CRPD). The
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,13,Constitution of Kenya 2010, in article 43. (1a) provides that “every person has the right to the highest attainable standard of health, which includes the right to healthcare services”. The goal of mental health policy is attainment of the highest standard of mental health. The policy seeks to address the systemic challenges, emerging trends and mitigate the burden of mental health problems and disorders through policy measures and strategies for achievement of optimal mental health status and capacity for individuals and communities. Also, to integrate the mental health services within the Kenya Essential Package for Health (KEPH) and to promote, respect and observe the rights of persons with mental disorders in accordance with National and International laws. The Mental health policy interventions are broad and cut across other sectors, and consequently, this calls for a multi-disciplinary and inter-sectoral approach in the implementation of this policy. The policy also recognizes that it is the collective responsibility of every person in the public and private sector to ensure the goal is attained. The Kenya Mental Health Policy implementation and monitoring framework stipulates
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,14,five yearly Mental Health Strategic Plans. The strategic plans provide activities under the priority actions supported by programme investment plans with objectives around specific health systems. It also stipulates a core set on indicators and targets to monitor and evaluate the implementation of the policy every 5 years. The results of the policy evaluation shall be used to inform the best practices in terms of mental health policy interventions. Mental Health Legislation The Mental Health Act was enacted in 1989, repealing the Mental Treatment Act of 1948 which provided for leadership and governance institutions such as Kenya Board of Mental Health, office of Director Mental Health and Mental Health Council (at then District level) among other provisions. However, the implementation has encountered many challenges including inadequate enforcement, lack of well-defined financial provisions, inadequacy on emerging issues, lack of alignment to the Constitution of Kenya 2010 and Convention of the Rights of Persons with Disability. The Health Act 2017 in Section 73 on Mental Health states the provisions of enactment of mental health legislation. Other laws such as penal code, criminal
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,15,procedure act etc. have clauses which negatively impact on mental health and thus the need for legal reforms. 12 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 CHAPTER 2: SITUATIONAL ANALYSIS Burden and prevalence of mental disorders: The Kenyan Context Currently, there is inadequate data and information on the prevalence of mental health, neurological, and substance use (MNS) in Kenya. However, it is estimated that up to 25% of outpatients and up to 40% of in-patients in health facilities suffer from mental conditions (KNCHR: 2011). Further, the probable prevalence of psychosis in Kenya is at an average of 1 % of the population (Kiima and Jenkins, 2012). The most frequent of diagnosis of mental illnesses made in general hospital settings are depression, substance abuse, stress related and anxiety disorders (Ndetei et al: 2008). The persistent reported traumatic events such as violence, disasters and conflicts as well as unemployment and poverty, may play a significant role in the development of rising trends of post-traumatic disorders, anxiety, depression and suicide among those affected. In Kenya, the mental health systems gaps are similar
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,16,to the elaborated global situation of low- and middle-income countries. The country is still struggling with the communicable diseases while the mental neurological and substance use disorders and other non-communicable conditions are on the rise leading to a double burden of disease. The Kenya Mental health policy identifies five key barriers to increased access to effective mental health services: • The absence of mental health from the public health agenda and the implications for funding • The current organization of mental health services • Lack of integration within primary care • Inadequate human resources for mental health • Lack of public mental health leadership. The Report by Taskforce on Mental Health (2020) The Taskforce on Mental Health was constituted following a Cabinet directive on 21st November 2019 and inaugurated on 11th December 2019 with primary mandate to study the status of mental health in Kenya through a consultative and participatory process with stakeholders across the country, including the legal, policy and administrative environment, related determinants and contributing risks factors to ill mental health and recommend transformative solutions to reform mental
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,17,health systems. KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 13 This was a follow up to Presidential Directive during the National celebrations to mark the 56th Madaraka day on 1st June 2019 held in Narok, where His Excellency, The President said, “Depression has today become a common phenomenon and it affects persons from all walks of life and ages. I urge employers and institutions of learning to invest more time and resources in monitoring and facilitating the mental well-being of their charges. I, therefore, direct the Ministry of Health in consultation with County Governments, Ministries of Education, Labour & Social Protection and Public Service, Youth & Gender Affairs, to formulate an appropriate policy response...” The taskforce report 2020 titled, “Mental Health and Wellbeing- Towards Happiness and National Prosperity” provides the status of mental health in Kenya under the following thematic areas with key recommendations; 1. Mental Health & Wellbeing: The understanding of mental health from majority of Kenyans was associated with negative narrative on mental illness leading to low focus on the importance and benefits of mental health and
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,18,wellbeing. Recommendations: • Promotion of mental health and wellness programmes at all levels of society • Cabinet to approve and gazette the National mental health awareness week on every 2nd week of October. 2. Burden of mental illness: Kenya has a high burden of mental illness measured on numbers of years lost due to ill health, disability and premature mortality with huge gaps in access to care. There were high reported cases of depression, suicide and substance use in various epidemiological studies as well as by the media reporting. Recommendations: • Declare mental ill health as a National public health emergency of an epidemic proportion. • A National suicide prevention program to be established with the role to restrict means, conduct surveillance, education, access to treatment, decriminalization, responsible media reporting, helpline and crisis intervention. 3. Mental health in special population: Some populations are more affected by the burden of ill mental health with a vicious cycle leading to a high impact on quality of life. Among the key vulnerable and special populations identified by the taskforce were: the youth, elderly,
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,19,prisoners, disciplined forces, and the boy child. 14 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 Recommendations: • Develop and implement guidelines, screening tools and user-friendly care and support pathways for special populations in Prisons, Schools, displaced populations, trauma survivors, veterans. 4. Social determinants of mental health: Kenyans were constantly going through various stressful and traumatizing experiences and exposures leading to increased vulnerability to mental ill health with far reaching impact on their health and quality of life. Recommendations: • The happiness of Kenyans and their wellness should be monitored. • Family affairs and Social protection policy to target mental health and psychosocial support services for vulnerable population. • Establish a surveillance mechanism on mental health to measure determinants of mental health. 5. Stigma and discrimination: In Kenya, stigma plays a significant role on how mental health is addressed. Stigma and discrimination lead to social exclusion, marginalization of users of mental health services and underfunding of the sector leading to poor service delivery. Recommendations: • Have multisectoral programmes against stigma and discrimination. • Launch Countrywide sustained anti-stigma and mental health
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,20,education campaign through public baraza, sport, media, art and cultural festivals. • Empowerment and inclusion of people with mental health conditions through reasonable accommodation in Education, skills development and Employment. • Quality Rights initiative implementation to improve quality of care, to protect, respect and fulfill the human rights of people with mental health conditions, psychosocial, intellectual and cognitive disabilities. 6. Policy and legislative framework: The mental health task force report pointed out the perennial non-prioritization of mental health policy implementation at National, County and Community levels. Mental Health Act enacted 1989 requires amendment to align to the Constitution, CRPD and address emerging issues. Other legislations were found to have clauses which negatively impacted on people with mental health conditions, psychosocial, intellectual and cognitive disabilities. KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 15 Recommendations: • Disseminate the Mental Health Policy to all MDA, Counties and Private sectors to implement mental health as part of their performance contracting. • Develop a Mental Health Action Plan with prioritized resources to fast track the implementation of the Policy. • Amend mental health act
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,21,to align to the constitution of Kenya, Health Act, International laws and address emerging issues. • Decriminalize Suicide and amend other laws which are discriminatory and use derogatory language. • Amend law relating to criminal justice system to ensure people with mental health conditions are not discriminated by criminalization of symptoms of mental illness and get fair administration of justice. • Implementation and enforcement of existing mental health related laws including Counsellors and Psychologist Act. 7. Leadership and governance: Inadequate mental health leadership structures at National and County levels. The Kenya board of mental health is not constituted and there are no mental health coordination mechanisms or focal point in health management teams in most Counties. Recommendations: • Establish a Commission for Mental Health and Happiness. • Establish the Directorate of Mental Health & Substance Use at the Ministry of Health. • Mandatory requirement for performance contracting by all Ministerial Departments and Agencies (MDA) and Counties to mainstream mental health programmes. • Establish County mental health council and county mental health coordinators. • Establish Sub county mental health focal point
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,22,and ward mental health committees. • Strengthen Users and Caregivers organizations and support groups. • Promote leadership for Youth Peers groups lead interventions in mental health. 8. Mental health services and systems: The current status is that many Kenyans have no access to mental healthcare despite the heavy burden in existence. The mental health services infrastructures are in dehumanizing conditions across different parts of the country. Kenya Medical Supply Agency (KEMSA) has inadequate stocks and inconsistent supply of emergency and other variety of quality drugs to mental health facilities in Kenya. 16 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 The multidisciplinary team of mental health professionals was in low ratio to the service need and some qualified professionals were unemployed. There were insufficient promotive and preventive services with focus on curative services in the delivery of mental health services. The system of forensic psychiatric services is dysfunctional with many people with mental health conditions not accessing healthcare services, fair administration of justice and fulfilment of their human rights. Recommendations: • Decentralize and integrate mental health services accessible by communities,
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,23,user friendly, people centred, recovery oriented and with a human rights approach. • Take urgent administrative measures to ensure availability of emergency drugs in mental health facilities. • Mathari National Teaching & Referral Hospital to be gazetted and operationalized as a semi-autonomous Institute of Neuropsychiatry and Mental Health. • An affirmative action fund to train and recruit critical threshold of mental health professionals in accordance to the multidisciplinary staff establishment at different levels of service across sectors. • Support implementation of psychosocial rehabilitation and aftercare services. • Preventive and promotive interventions programmes. 9. Mental health financing and UHC: Only 0.01% of the national health budget is allocated to mental health. Kenyans have been forced into poverty due to out-of-pocket payment for mental healthcare. The amount of money ought to be spend on mental health is KES 250 per capita but Kenya is spending 15 cents. NHIF cover is not comprehensive and private insurance policies are discriminatory. Recommendations: • Urgently reduce out of pocket payment for mental health services by increasing public funding for mental health under Universal Health Care. •
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,24,Increase general government revenue to closely match the international median health financing of KES 250 per capita per year. • Insurance healthcare financing by NHIF to provide comprehensive coverage of outpatient and inpatient mental health care package. • Insurance Regulatory Authority (IRA) to ensure all insurance companies are compliant with the law in respect to issuance of equitable medical cover for all mental health conditions including substance use disorders and suicide attempts. KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 17 • Mental Health Act amendments to provide for mental health fund to address mental health disparities which will include revenue raised from sin taxes to be managed by the commission on mental health and happiness. • Tax incentives for organizations that promote and support implementation of approved mental health programmes to service users and caregivers. 10. Mental health data and research: The current health information system is inadequate in not addressing specific mental health conditions in data collection and reporting. Also, inadequate mental health research data in Kenya. Recommendations: • Carry out a national mental health survey to establish
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,25,the burden, determinants and impact of mental ill health. • Additional funding to Mathari hospital to build research capacity in mental health working in collaboration with KEMRI and other partners. 18 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 SWOT Analysis of Mental Health Systems in Kenya The strategic focus of this action plan considers the following situational analysis of mental health systems in Kenya to come up with objectives and interventions which will be of high impact and transformative. Strengths: Limitations: • Enabling Constitution of Kenya • There exists mental health care disparities at policy and • Legislative framework: Health ACT 2017 section 73 – Legislation on services investment priorities comparative to the focus mental health and the Mental Health ACT 1989-Kenya Mental Health on other health services such as communicable diseases Board, office the Director of mental health. (Organizational structure) prevention and control. • Kenya Health Policy 2014-2030. • Limited access to quality mental health services at all • Availability of Kenya Mental Health Policy 2015-2030 levels of healthcare. Only 14 County hospitals have • Existing Health strategies,
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,26,guidelines, protocols and frameworks with functional mental health unit. focus on mental health. • Inadequate infrastructure for mental health services at all • Existing Organizational Structures at policy level (Division of Mental levels of care (public and private sector). Health) • Poor integration of mental health services in the • Availability of trained mental health professionals. healthcare service delivery and referral system. • Training of mental health workforce in public and private medical • Inadequate budgetary allocation with limited fund training colleges and universities. disbursed only covering the recurrent expenditures at • Health workers training curricula include course content on psychiatry hospital level. and mental health. • Shortage of human resources for mental health. • Mental health services under essential health benefit package under • Unequal distribution of the existing trained mental health Universal Health Coverage programme. professionals especially in arid and semi-arid regions. • Existing budget line allocation for mental health at Ministry of Health. • Limitation in mental health course content in the training • Willing Public private partnership in mental health promotion and curricula for other health
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,27,workers. advocacy on international mental health days • Inadequate collecting and reporting of mental health • Kenya essential medicines list contains first and second generation indicators. psychotropics medicines available at Kenya Medical Supply agency • Inadequate mental health products and equipment. (KEMSA) • Lack of well-coordinated collaborative structures and • Specialized mental health training and referral hospital (Mathari mechanisms amongst entities in the mental health. National teaching and referral Hospital). KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 19 Opportunities: Threats:  Political will with the Presidential directive on mental health and  Stigmatization of persons with mental health conditions Universal Health Care agenda. and mental health services (internal and external)  With the increasing global focus and commitments on mental health  Negative socio-cultural beliefs and practices. The (SDGs, WHA resolutions, UNGAs, Mental Health Action Plan, AU chronic nature of mental illness and associated commitments on substance use) NCDs and UHC it may be easier to burden of disease and disability. access funding.  Mental health disparity with non- prioritization of mental  Increased advocacy on the investment on
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,28,mental health by users, health with shift of focus on other disease conditions. caregiver, young people, NGOs, corporates and other stakeholders  Human resources; reduced training to meet the population  Increasing resources and materials to train on evidence based and best needs and the brain drain. practices interventions in mental health.  Declining budgetary allocation visa vis, the rising burden  The technological advancement for innovation and effectiveness in of mental health. service delivery.  Social determinants of mental health in a changing  Availability of media platforms for mental health advocacy world; conflicts, trauma and humanitarian communication, education and management. emergencies, population movements, urbanization,  Trained human resources who are available for employment in public socioeconomic and sociocultural disadvantages, and private sectors. climate change and technological advancement Low  Increasing Training and Research grants funding opportunities. level of mental health literacy.  Leverage on other existing health services platforms to integrate  Increasing prevalence and trends of substance use and mental health services. addictive behaviors.  Public private partnerships to strengthen mental health systems  High costs of
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,29,treatment.  Demographic changes- engendering understanding and importance of mental health. 20 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 CHAPTER 3: STRATEGIC FOCUS VISION: A Nation where mental health is valued and promoted, mental conditions are prevented and persons affected by mental conditions are treated without stigmatization and discrimination. GOAL: To attain the highest standards of mental health. STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES: 1. To strengthen effective leadership and governance for mental health. 2. To implement strategies for promotion of mental health, prevention of mental and substance use disorders. 3. To ensure access to comprehensive, integrated and high quality, promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative mental health services at all levels of healthcare. 4. To strengthen mental health systems including information system and research. The action plan relies on six cross-cutting principles and approaches: Universal health coverage: Regardless of age, sex, socioeconomic status, race, ethnicity or any other status and following the principle of equity. Persons with mental health conditions should be able to access, without the risk of depriving themselves, essential health and social services that enable them to achieve recovery and
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,30,the highest attainable standard of health. KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 21 Human rights: Mental health strategies, actions and interventions for treatment, prevention and promotion must be compliant with the Constitution of Kenya, Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and other international and regional human rights instruments. Evidence-based practice: Mental health strategies and interventions for treatment, prevention and promotion need to be based on scientific evidence and/or best practice, taking cultural considerations into account. Life course approach: Policies, plans and services for mental health need to take account of health and social needs at all stages of the life course, including infancy, childhood, adolescence, adulthood and older age. Multisectoral approach: A comprehensive and coordinated response for mental health requires partnership with multiple public sectors such as Health, National treasury, Education, Security, Employment, Trade, Judicial, Housing, Social and other relevant sectors as well as the private sectors. Empowerment of persons with mental disorders and psychosocial disabilities: Persons with mental health conditions, psychosocial, intellectual and cognitive disabilities and their families should be empowered and involved in mental
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,31,health advocacy, policy, planning, legislation, service provision, monitoring, research and evaluation. These are the Objectives that all the actors will be expected to implement in order to achieve set targets and realize the policy Goal. STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 1: STRENGTHENING LEADERSHIP AND GOVERNANCE FOR MENTAL HEALTH (Stewardship, Advocacy, Partnerships and Effective Governance Structures) Strategic Action 1.1: Strengthening Planning for Mental Health Resources (Resource planning) • Mental health plans and budgetary allocation across all relevant sectors that is commensurate with identified mental health needs and required resources. 22 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 Strategic Action 1. 2: Mainstreaming Mental Health across Sectors (Stakeholder collaboration) • Leveraging on existing Partnership Frameworks to mainstream Mental Health into the existing programs through; integrated actions for intersectoral implementation of mental health plans, development and implementation of an MNS communication strategy and dissemination of IEC materials. • Establishment of intersectoral coordination mechanisms for joint planning and implementation in line with the existing partnership framework. Strategic Action 1.3: Adaptation and Implementation of Mental Health Policies and legislation (Policy and law) • The County Governments develop
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,32,plans to implement National policies, Strategies and Programmes on mental health. • Conduct an audit of existing Acts of Parliament that have an impact on Mental Health and propose amendments, align the Mental Health Act to be in tandem with the Constitution, the Health Act, Human rights instruments and any other relevant legislation. • The new legislation will make provision for establishment of a Mental Health parity and equity fund, establishment of County Mental Health coordination units, and appointment of mental health focal persons at the counties level. Strategic Action 1.4: Strengthening and empowerment of people with mental health conditions and psychosocial disabilities and their organizations • Engagement and participation of Users Organizations, people with mental health conditions, psychosocial, intellectual and cognitive disabilities in matters concerning their health and care. TARGETS AND INDICATORS: Target 1.1: National and County governments to have annual mental health plans with increased budget allocation for mental health (Promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative) 100% (by the year 2022/23) Indicator: Annual mental health plans with progressively increasing budgetary allocation. KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,33,23 Target 1.2: Functional intersectoral collaborative technical working groups (TWG) and coordination committees at National and County Levels Indicator: Number of counties with functional TWG (implementation of activities on the mental health plan) Target 1.3: Audit undertaken of Acts of parliament that have an impact on mental health and revision of Mental Health Act 100% (By the year 2022/2023). Indicator: Existence of revised Mental health act that is in line with the Constitution, Health act and ratified international instruments (yes/no). Target 1.4: 100% of Counties set up County mental health coordination unit with a mental health focal person (mental health coordinator). (By the year 2022/23) Indicator: Existence of County Mental Coordination unit and a mental health coordinator. (Yes/no) Target 1.5: User Organizations active participation in mental health roles and responsibilities at National and in all Counties (100% by 2022/23). Indicators: Number of Counties with operational Users Organizations actively participating in the development and implementation of annual mental health work plans, and other community mental health activities. STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 2: TO IMPLEMENT STRATEGIES FOR PROMOTION OF MENTAL HEALTH AND PREVENTION OF
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,34,MENTAL AND SUBSTANCE USE DISORDERS. Strategic Action 2.1: Promotion of Mental Health: Good mental health of individuals, families, the communities and the society contribute enormously towards investment and development of social capital an important determinant of health. Mental health promotion should be availed to individuals, families, communities and the society spearheaded by primary health care team in partnership with other government sectors, Non-Governmental Organizations, Community Based Organizations, Faith Based Organizations and the Private sector. Family, Workplace and School Mental health will include: • Integration of parenting skills education in existing parent-child health programs (ANC, MCH-FP) to address threats to healthy parent child bond and adverse childhood experiences. 24 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 • Life skills education programs offered to school-going children and college-going persons. • Provision of psychological counseling services in schools and colleges for mental health conditions and emotional distress. • Training of teachers in mental health to implement mental health literacy curricula in all learning institutions. • Introduce workplace wellness support programs to assist employees in handling stressful life situations and access to employer
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,35,assisted treatment programs. • Dissemination of reliable mental health information and education materials to the public. • Implementation of mental health promotion and advocacy campaign at the community level as well as to the policy makers. • Develop and implement stigma reduction strategies to ensure there is no violation of human rights and discrimination against persons with mental health conditions in schools and communities, in attaining or retaining jobs. Strategic Action 2.2: Preventive Programs: Multisectoral integrated programs that combines universal and targeted interventions for: promoting mental health and preventing mental disorders; reducing stigmatization, discrimination and human rights violations; and which are responsive to specific vulnerable groups across the lifespan. Two key prevention programs will include: • Suicide prevention: Develop and implement comprehensive national strategic interventions for the prevention of suicide, with special attention to vulnerable groups identified as at an increased risk of suicide. The strategies to be implemented by National and County governments working in collaboration with all stakeholders. • Substance use prevention: Effective substance use prevention will involve evidence based multiple interventions implemented across sectors aimed at demand
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,36,reduction and harm reduction. This will include: To invest in a National Substance use Prevention and Control Program that provide technical guidance to improve access to o effective substance use prevention programs, treatment and rehabilitation services across the country. To integrate substance use treatment and care in the health care system in a comprehensive continuum of care with referral o strategy from the community level. To ensure continuous capacity building and quality assurance to meet the guidelines and standards for evidence-based and best o practices in substance use treatment and care. KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 25 TARGETS AND INDICATORS: Target 2.1: 100% of counties will have a functioning multisectoral mental health promotion and preventive interventions programmes. (by the year 2023). Indicator; Functioning County preventive and promotive mental health programs (yes/no) Target 2.2: The rate of suicide mortality in Kenya will be reduced by 10% (by the year 2023) Indicator; Number of suicide deaths per year per 100,000 populations. Target 2.2: The alcohol per capita consumption will be reduced by 10% (by the year 2023) Indicator; Morbidity
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,37,rate of alcohol use disorders, per annum for 100,000 of a population. At t functioning national, programmes (by t STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 3: TO ENSURE ACCESS TO COMPREHENSIVE, INTEGRATED AND HIGH-QUALITY MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES AT ALL LEVELS. Strategic Action 3.1; Mental health services reorganization, transformation and expanded coverage: The mental health services reorganization will aim to shift the services to primary care and community level, this will include; community based mental health services, comprehensive mental health centres, day care centres, outpatient and short-stay inpatient care in general hospitals and community psychosocial support of people with mental health conditions living with their families. The services will integrate and coordinate holistic prevention, promotion, rehabilitation, care and support that aims at meeting both mental and physical health care needs, protect and promote human rights and a person-centered recovery approach. Decentralization of services and integration of care within other health services as well as multisectoral mental health programs will ensure wider coverage and improve access. The implementation of Quality Rights mental health initiative will transform services through improvement of quality of care, promote human rights
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,38,and recovery-oriented approach. The services will be people centered with continuous support supervision and monitoring to ensure they adhere to the standards of care and evidence-based guidelines. 26 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 Strategic Action 3.2; Human resources development for service delivery: The strategic action will be to train and recruit mental health professionals to bridge the gaps in human resources per population ratio. This will be achieved through introduction of mental health curricula in undergraduate and graduate training of health care workers. Also, continuous in-service training and mentoring of health workers including community health volunteers, particularly in non-specialized settings to enable them be able to screen and identify people with mental health conditions and offer appropriate care. Strategic Action 3.3; Mental health and psychosocial support in humanitarian emergencies: National and County Governments in collaboration with stakeholders to provide effective mental health and psychosocial support services in disasters and emergency response. The services should cater for population mental health needs, provide psychosocial support and information, counselling and psychological services to address trauma and promote recovery and resilience.
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,39,To achieve this key strategic action especially in response to COVID -19 pandemic and in future disasters and emergencies management • Mental Health and psychosocial support (MHPSS) readiness in every county: The counties to establish MHPSS teams which coordinates the response and develop strategies for recovery management. Also, to continuously monitor and mitigate risk factors, manage long term mental health impact and have emergency preparedness contingency plans • Capacity building of Mental Health and psychosocial support (MHPSS) services across the country: To train service providers in the country on how to deliver Psychological First Aid (PFA) and other emergencies psychosocial support to the different population segments. In additional recruitment of human resource for mental health in all counties including psychologists, medical social workers, occupational therapists, psychiatrists and mental health nurses to strengthen healthcare system to address surge in mental health conditions. • Mental Health and psychosocial support (MHPSS) services infrastructure: Establish a national tele mental health and suicide prevention lifeline. The use of ICT infrastructure will facilitate emergency services provision, clinical supervision and training for MHPSS service providers and other
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,40,health care workers and ensure continuity of care for persons with pre-existing mental health conditions across the country. KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 27 • Long-term strategy for follow up care and support: Follow up care for the affected people to monitor and support recovery, continuous screening to mitigate or manage long term complications. To strengthen and facilitate referral mechanisms and outreach services in the counties for people requiring specialised care. To conduct assessment of long-term mental health impact, formulate and implement rehabilitation and reintegration mechanisms in the counties for persons affected by COVID 19 and other emergencies. TARGETS AND INDICATORS: Target 3:1 Decentralized mental health service coverage increased by 50% (by the year 2022/23 Counties with functional mental health unit- outpatients’ clinics, inpatients services/unit in health facilities, community-based services) Indicator: Proportion of Counties with a functional mental health unit at Level 3, 4 and 5 health facilities Target 3:2 Mental health services integration in the primary health care in all the Counties (50% 2022/23) then 100% by 2025. Indicator: Number of community health units trained and
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,41,providing community mental health services. Target 3.3 Train healthcare workers on quality of care and human rights standards according to the WHO quality rights tool Kit (100% 2022/23) Indicator: The percentage of hospital complying to the recommended quality rights standards. Target: 3.4 5% of health care providers per county trained in specialised mental health by 2025. Indicator: The proportion of health care workers trained per county by 2025. Target: 3.5. Capacity building training of health workers and other providers on mental health and psychosocial support (MHPSS) on humanitarian emergency management. (100% by 2022/23). Indicator: Proportion of teams of County providers trained (MHPSS County teams) and actively providing psychosocial care or humanitarian emergency services. 28 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 Target 3.6: To conduct a National mental health impact assessment survey by 2023/24 Indicator: The mental health impact assessment survey report Target 3.7: 100% of Counties have developed and costed contingency plans for mental health and psychosocial support in emergencies and recovery by 2022/23. Indicator: Proportion of Counties which have developed and costed contingency plans for mental health
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,42,and psychosocial support in emergencies and recovery by 2022/23. STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE 4: TO STRENGTHEN MENTAL HEALTH SYSTEMS Strategic Action 4.1 Information systems: To develop and disseminate a simplified data collection tool to the county health facilities and train health workers to record and report mental health data. Integrate mental health indicators into the routine health information system and use the analysed core mental health data to inform mental health service delivery, promotion and prevention strategies and to provide data for the Global Mental Health Observatory (as a part of WHO’s Global Health Observatory). Strategic Action 4.2 Evidence and research: To achieve this strategic action the following activities and intervention will be paramount; conduct a baseline survey to identify the magnitude of mental health problems, burden of mental disorders and the gaps in the mental health systems in Kenya. To conduct trainings on research methodology at National and County levels targeting skills development of health workers in mental health research. To establish a centre of excellence in mental health research at Mathari National Teaching and Referral Hospital in collaboration with other
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,43,academic and research institutions to support in building the capacity in mental health research. The strategic actions will improve research capacity and academic collaboration on national priorities for research in mental health, particularly operational research with direct relevance to service development and implementation science. Strategic Action 4.3; Mental Healthcare financing for Universal Health Care: All persons with mental health conditions should be enrolled to the National Hospital Insurance Fund (NHIF) upon evaluation by the specialized mental health care providers. The package provided by the NHIF should cover the out-patient costs, in patient costs, treatment and substance use rehabilitation costs and provide essential health benefit package for comprehensive mental health services (at primary, secondary and KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 29 tertiary levels) including long term treatment of substance use related & addictive disorders under Universal Health Care. To support people with mental health conditions and psychosocial disabilities access to disability and social protection financial support. Through legislation create a mental health fund to finance community mental health programmes through Public Private Partnerships and budgetary allocation of conditional
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,44,grants to County for Community mental health programmes Strategic Action 4.4; Infrastructure for primary mental healthcare: Establish appropriate infrastructure for integrated and comprehensive primary care, community-based health and social care services (Mental health outpatient facility, Community residential supported living, halfway homes, Day care, Mobile crisis and outreach services, Respite homes). Establish special targeted user-friendly psychosocial support centres for vulnerable populations; children and youth, older persons and trauma recovery centres. Develop norms and standards for primary mental healthcare with set regulations under the regulatory bodies to provide for registration, licensing and quality assurance. Strategic Action 4.5: Access to Essential Medicines, Equipment and Technologies: To provide an assorted list of essential medicine and equipment for each level of care covered under UHC health benefit package. This will ensure access to affordable and cost effective essential psychotropic drugs and nonpharmaceutical materials in defined stocks of Assorted kits for community, primary, secondary and tertiary care levels. Ring fenced budget for Essential Medicines, Equipment and Technologies in mental health at National and County level to ensure procurement of diagnostic and therapeutic equipment and technologies, efficient
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,45,logistics and technology facilities to enhance effective provision of tele mental health. TARGETS AND INDICATORS: Target 4.1: 100% of Counties will be routinely collecting and reporting at least a core set of mental health indicators monthly through DHIS 2(by the year 2022/23) Indicator: Proportion of Counties routinely collecting and reporting the core set of mental health indicators quarterly through DHIS 2. Target 4.2: To conduct a baseline National mental health survey by 2021/22 Indicator: The mental health survey report 30 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 Target 4.3: 100% NHIF enrolment of persons with mental illness attending health facility annually. Indicator: Proportion of persons with mental illness using NHIF to access mental health care services. Target 4.4: 100% of Level 4,5 and 6 health facilities with designated mental health services infrastructure (mental health unit, mobile services, telemental health services) by 2022/23. Indicator: The proportion of level 4,5 and 6 hospitals with mental health services infrastructure. Target 4.5: 80% of filling rate (standard order form) of essential medicines, equipment and technologies on mental health at Level 4,5 and 6
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,46,health facilities annually. Indicator: Proportion of Counties with stock in of essential medicines, diagnostics/ therapeutic equipment and technologies for mental health services. KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 31 CHAPTER 4: INVESTMENT AREAS AND RESOURCES MOBILIZATION INVESTMENT AREAS: The investment and program areas will be guided by the Kenya Mental Health Policy directives and the key findings and recommendations by the Taskforce on Mental Health to implement the five years action plan strategic actions geared to achieve the set targets and indicators. The following are priority investment areas. 1. Mental health leadership and governance. 7. Medical products, equipment and technologies. 2. Human resources development and management. 8. Mental health information health system and research. 3. Mental healthcare financing and Universal Health Care. 9. Mental health and vulnerable population. 4. Mental health services delivery. 10. Advocacy and partnership for stigma reduction and user’s empowerment. 5. Substance use prevention and control. 11. Social determinants of mental Health. 6. Infrastructure for mental health services. 1. Mental health leadership and governance: Priority investment; • Establishment of an oversight and advisory body (Commission
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,47,of Mental Health/Mental Health Board) which will oversee and steward a cross cutting sectoral mental health issues and report on the status of mental health as well as the National Happiness Index. • Strengthen Directorate of Mental Health to provide policy leadership, technical guidance and coordination of mental health activities in Kenya. • Countrywide dissemination of the policy, strengthening of mental planning and implementation of strategic actions. 32 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 • Legal reform in mental health; Audit, review and revise the Mental Health related Legislation to conform to the constitutional requirements and implement other health-related laws. • Mainstreaming mental health across sectors; with establishment of mental health programs in the relevant ministries, state departments and agencies as part of mandatory performance contracting requirements. • Establish County Mental Health Coordination units that shall coordinate mental health services at the county level. • Decentralization and reorganization of mental health systems and services in accordance to the devolved system of Government • Empowerment of users and caregivers to participate in the planning of recovery-oriented community based mental
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,48,health services meeting quality of care and human rights standards. • Public awareness creation campaign, advocacy and intersectoral partnership. 2. Human resources development and management: Priority Investment; • Training funds to support and finance the training of more mental health workers at National and County levels. • Review and revise the training curricula of all health workers to integrate mental health training • Expand mental health training programs to all Kenya Medical Training Colleges in Kenya and other service providers training institutions. • Training and Recruitment of mental health workers cadres to attain the staff establishment at different levels of care {Psychiatrists; Mental health nurses (KRMHN); Mental health nurses KRPN; Psychologists (medical, health and Clinical); Higher Diploma (HD) in Addiction science and management; Medical social workers training in KMTC; Clinical Medicine HD Psychiatry & Mental health; Occupational therapists} • Training of primary care providers on mental health (mhGAP training program) • Training of Community Health Units on mental health modules • Develop and implement mental health training programs for other services providers across sectors. • Collaborate with regulatory bodies to
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,49,strengthen the regulation and standards of care provided by the mental health professionals. • Continuous education and professional development • Equitable deployment and motivation to retain service providers at all levels of acre including incentives for people working in hardship areas • Resources for human resources technical supportive supervision and professional development. KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 33 3. Mental health services delivery: Priority investment; Promotion of Mental Health • Family skills training programs • School mental health programs. • Workplace mental health programs. • Targeted vulnerable population community mental health programs (People with disability, Correctional facilities, Security sector and veterans, displaced population etc.) • Public communication and education programs to reduce stigma. Prevention of Mental, Neurological and Substance use Disorders • Alcohol prevention and control program • Other substances use prevention and control programs • Harm reduction program • Suicide prevention program • Community and cross sectoral risks reduction and resiliency building programs (Safe spaces and amenities, mental health friendly zones, Youth empowerment programs, Community service and volunteerism etc.) Treatment and Rehabilitation of Mental, Neurological and
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,50,Substance use disorders. • Community level; Screening, early identification and treatment of MNS disorders, establish community based mental health services, psychosocial support and rehabilitation. • Develop community-based programmes to support community inclusion, families and foster recovery. • Establish social protection and disability benefit programmes for person with MNS disorders. • Primary care level: Establish functional Outpatient mental health clinics, Integration of mental health into existing primary health care programs (ANC, MCH, HIV/AIDs, NCD etc.). • Secondary care level: Develop functional County mental health units, training of health workers and capacity building for integration of mental health in existing primary health care programs. • Specialized Tertiary level: Establish centre of excellence for referral specialized mental health services, training and research; with the restructuring and improvement of Mathari hospital with six regional specialized centres. 34 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 • Develop norms and standards for mental health services and implement clinical and social audits for continuous quality improvement. • Coordination and Organization of Mental Health Care in humanitarian settings, disasters and emergencies. 4. Substance use disorders prevention, treatment
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,51,and care: Priority investment; • National strategic program on substance use prevention, treatment and rehabilitation. • Infrastructure development at National and County level to improve access to effective substance use treatment and care services. • To integrate substance use treatment and care in the health care system and social welfare system in the comprehensive continuum of care. • Capacity building and quality assurance to meets the guidelines and standards for evidence-based and best practices in substance use treatment and care. 5. Mental healthcare financing and Universal Health Care: Priority investment; • Counties’ mental health plans and budgetary allocation for mental healthcare financing. • Enrollment of all persons with mental health conditions including treatment of substance use &addictive disorders to NHIF • Establish Conditional grants (mental health parity and equity fund) for community health programmes to support users’ recovery plans and bridge mental health disparities. • Allocation of funds from sin taxes to support mental health services and programs. • Public private partnerships and voluntary private sector participation in provision of mental health services and financing. • Enforce the law to
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,52,protect and ensure that health insurance industry does not discriminate against persons with Mental, Neurological and Substance use (MNS) disorders in accessing insurance policies. 6. Infrastructure for mental health: Priority Investment: • Develop a Centre of excellence in Neuropsychiatry and Mental Health Institute. • Establish six regional specialized Centres of Excellence in treatment and care in MNS. • Establish appropriate infrastructure for integrated community, outpatient and inpatient comprehensive for MNS at County and sub county Hospitals. • National tele-mental health services and suicide prevention lifeline technology. KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 35 • Establish special targeted user-friendly clinics for vulnerable populations; children and youth, older persons and trauma recovery centres. • Developing norms and standards to guide the planning, development, and maintenance of health infrastructure. • Adequate and efficient transport and communication facilities to enhance outreach services. 7. Mental health information health system and research: Priority Investment; • Conduct a National Baseline survey (KDHS -household survey) • Collection of data on mental health indicators through general health information and reporting systems. • Monitoring and evaluation of specific
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,53,mental health strategy indicators on quarterly basis. • Strengthen mental health research through funding and partnership for evidence-based information in mental health. Capacity building on mental health research and systematic analysis of mental health research data. • Annual National Mental Health Conference • Establishment a National Mental Health Institute. 8. Health Products, Equipment and Technologies: Priority Investment; • Stock in subsidized cost effective essential psychotropic drugs and nonpharmaceutical materials for defined assorted kits for community, primary, secondary and tertiary care levels. • Efficient logistics, information and communication technology equipment to facilitate effective provision tele mental health. • Procurement for stock of diagnostic and therapeutic equipment and technologies; Electroencephalogram (EEG) machines, Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation machines, Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) machines, CT Scans, Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) machines, Drugs of abuse toxicology kits for 47 County Hospitals. 9. Mental health and vulnerable population: Priority Investment; • Implementation of guidelines, screening tools and user-friendly care and support pathways for special populations in prisons, schools, displaced populations, trauma survivors, veterans to mention but a few. 10. Advocacy and partnership for stigma reduction and user’s empowerment:
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,54,Priority Investment; • Anti-stigma and mental health promotion campaign through; multisectoral programmes, sport and media. 36 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 • Empower and include people with mental health conditions through reasonable accommodation in education, skills development and employment. • Inclusion of people with mental conditions in policy development, decision making and program as a strategy of dealing with stigma and discrimination. • Implement quality rights mental health initiative to educate the public on mental health and human rights aimed at changing narrative and attitudes and practices; transform services and reform policies and legislative framework • Social marketing to bring social and behaviour change: package of services, modern infrastructure, champions advocates and branding. 11. Social determinants of mental Health Priority Investment; • Surveillance mechanism to conduct continuous monitoring and evaluation of mental health determinants and report on happiness index. • Advisory on measures to mitigate risks (socioeconomic, sociocultural, demographic, environmental, neighborhood); strategies to promote mental health and wellbeing. • Family affairs and social protection programs targeting mental health and psychosocial support services to vulnerable populations as well
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,55,as promote family skills and unity. RESOURCES REQUIREMENTS AND MOBILISATION: To provide sustainable comprehensive mental health care services for Kenyans, as envisaged in Kenya mental health policy (2015-2030) requires adequate and sustained flow of resources. The modes of financing include public funding through taxation and user fees, donor funds, health insurance and public private partnership. There has been mental health care financing disparity and inequality from all these sources leading to unavailability or poor and inaccessible mental health services. This is negatively compounded by socioeconomic drift of person with mental disorders and general economic environment in low- and middle-income countries. The resources requirements will be based on estimates costs derived from strategic priority action targets, documented unit costs; epidemiological data on mental health problem; norms and standards. Information on estimate unit costs, resources available, and the financing gap should assist stakeholders to develop realistic annual mental health budgets and resources mobilization for effective policy implementation to bridge the huge mental health gaps. Resource mobilization and allocation to the investments area will be important inputs to implementation of priority actions at
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,56,different level of healthcare in devolved Governments for realization of strategic objectives targets. KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 37 CHAPTER 5: MULTI SECTORAL COORDINATION, MONITORING AND EVALUATION MULTISECTORAL COORDINATION: Mental health issues cut across different sectors apart from the health sector. This is because the macro determinants of mental health cut across all public sectors. To address intersectoral collaboration and partnership for effective implementation the following priority actions will be undertaken; • The Government shall ensure that mental health policy issues are integrated and mainstreamed in all policies and legislations. • The Government shall establish and coordinate inter-agency collaboration that brings together all public and private agencies whose policies have implications on mental health. • There shall be a framework for partnership with all mental health non-state actors such as faith based and civil society organizations. • Mental health advocacy by all stakeholders • Management and coordination of role and responsibilities of stakeholders by interagency coordination committee in accordance to overall Health Sector Management and Coordination Framework. • Core indicators for the specific targets’ outcomes • Costing
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,57,and budgeting of the investments plan in the National and County mental health budget and financial appropriation plans • Quarterly report from Counties Government and stakeholders to the National mental health Policy implementation taskforce for aggregated National report • Annual stakeholder meeting to review the implementation work MONITORING AND EVALUATION: The defined core set on indicators for Mental Health Actions shall be continuously monitored and evaluated throughout the implementation process. This will ensure data is systematically generated, captured and used for decision making and performance improvements to achieve the strategic objectives and Policy GOAL. The Ministry of health is responsible for the overall implementation of the plan, with various stakeholders responsible for achieving the targets of priority actions. The Counties will ensure the indicators data on the targets are measured 38 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 and reported through the health information management system but also through a parallel special designed monitoring and evaluation framework. Annually the status report will be prepared on trends of progress in priority actions, timelines and resources available and Gaps thereof. The
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,58,report will make recommendations about the status and actions needed by management. The Mental health taskforce report recognized various roles to be played by different sectors in addressing mental health conditions and recommended a multisectoral approach with Key Actors as follows: Thematic area Key Findings Key Recommendations Actors 1. Burden of Mental a) Kenya has a high burden of mental a) Declare mental ill health a National Cabinet illness illness. This is measured based on Public Health Emergency. numbers of years lost due to ill b) Institute a national suicide prevention Commission on Mental health, disability and premature program. Health and Happiness mortality with huge gaps in access to care. Ministry of Health b) Many cases of depression, suicide and substance use were reported in various epidemiological studies as well as reporting by the media. 2. Mental health a) Some populations are more a) Develop and implement guidelines, Commission on Mental and special vulnerable to the burden of mental ill screening tools and user-friendly care Health and Happiness population health with a vicious cycle leading to and support pathways for
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,59,special high impact on quality of life. populations in prisons, schools, displaced Ministry of Health b) The key vulnerable and special populations, trauma survivors, veterans. Ministry of Education populations identified by the taskforce were: the youth, elderly, MDA and Counties prisoners, disciplined forces, and the boy child. Users and Caregivers NGOs and Private sector KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 39 3. Mental health and a) Kenyans have a poor a) The Taskforce recommends promotion of Commission on Mental wellbeing understanding of mental health. mental health and wellness programmes Health and Happiness They thought that mental health at all levels of society. was synonymous with mental b) Cabinet to approve and gazette the Ministry of Health illness. National Mental Health Awareness b) Negative narrative on mental week to be observed every 2nd week of Ministry of Public services illness leading to low focus on October. and Gender Affairs the importance and benefits of MDA and Counties mental wellbeing and wellbeing Users and Caregivers NGOs and Private sector 4. Social a) Kenyans are a traumatized a) An annual measure
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,60,of happiness index Commission on Mental determinants and population. They have had many with focus on population mental Health and Happiness other factors experiences and exposures wellbeing contributing to ill leading to increased vulnerability b) Family Affairs and Social protection Ministry of Labour and mental health to mental ill health with far policy to have a focus on mental health Social protection reaching impact on their health and psychosocial support services for and quality of life. vulnerable populations c) Establish a surveillance mechanism on mental health to measure determinants of mental health 40 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 5. Stigma and a) In Kenya, stigma plays a a) Have multi-sectoral programmes against Commission on Mental discrimination significant role on how mental stigma and discrimination Health and Happiness health is addressed. b) Launch countrywide sustained anti- b) Stigma and discrimination lead to stigma and mental health education social exclusion, marginalization campaigns through public barazas, sport, Ministry of Health, of users of mental health services media, art and cultural festivals. and underfunding of the sector c) Empowerment and inclusion
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,61,of people leading to poor service delivery. with mental health conditions through MDA and Counties reasonable accommodation in Education, Employment, Skills training and Policies development. NGOs and Private sector d) Quality Rights initiative implementation to improve quality of care, to protect, respect and fulfil the human rights of people with mental health conditions, Users and Caregivers psychosocial, intellectual and cognitive disabilities. 6. Policy and a) Lack of prioritization of the a) Disseminate the Mental Health Policy Commission on Mental legislative implementation of mental health to all MDAs, counties and the private Health and Happiness framework policy at National, County and sector to implement mental health as Community levels. part of their performance contracting. KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 41 b) Mental Health Act enacted 1989 b) Develop a Mental Health Action Ministry of Health requires amendment. Plan with prioritized resources to c) Other legislations were found to fast track the implementation of the have clauses which negatively policy. State Law Office and impact on people with mental c) Amend mental health act to align to department of
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,62,Justice health conditions, psychosocial, the constitution of Kenya, Health intellectual and cognitive Act, International laws and address disabilities. emerging issues. d) Decriminalize suicide and amend Kenya Law Reform other laws which are discriminatory Commission and use derogatory language. e) Amend law relating to criminal justice system to ensure people with mental health conditions are not Parliament discriminated by criminalization of symptoms of mental illness and get fair Judiciary administration of justice. f) Implement and enforce existing mental health related laws including the Counsellors and Psychologists Act 42 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 d) Mental Health Act enacted 1989 g) Develop a Mental Health Action Ministry of Health requires amendment. Plan with prioritized resources to e) Other legislations were found to fast track the implementation of the have clauses which negatively policy. State Law Office and impact on people with mental h) Amend mental health act to align to department of Justice health conditions, psychosocial, the constitution of Kenya, Health intellectual and cognitive Act, International laws and address disabilities. emerging issues. i) Decriminalize suicide and amend Kenya Law
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,63,Reform other laws which are discriminatory Commission and use derogatory language. j) Amend law relating to criminal justice system to ensure people with mental health conditions are not Parliament discriminated by criminalization of symptoms of mental illness and get fair Judiciary administration of justice. k) Implement and enforce existing mental health related laws including the Counsellors and Psychologists Act KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 43 f) Mental Health Act enacted 1989 l) Develop a Mental Health Action Ministry of Health requires amendment. Plan with prioritized resources to g) Other legislations were found to fast track the implementation of the have clauses which negatively policy. State Law Office and impact on people with mental m) Amend mental health act to align to department of Justice health conditions, psychosocial, the constitution of Kenya, Health intellectual and cognitive Act, International laws and address disabilities. emerging issues. n) Decriminalize suicide and amend Kenya Law Reform other laws which are discriminatory Commission and use derogatory language. o) Amend law relating to criminal justice system to ensure people with mental health conditions are
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,64,not Parliament discriminated by criminalization of symptoms of mental illness and get fair Judiciary administration of justice. p) Implement and enforce existing mental health related laws including the Counsellors and Psychologists Act 44 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 h) Mental Health Act enacted 1989 q) Develop a Mental Health Action Ministry of Health requires amendment. Plan with prioritized resources to i) Other legislations were found to fast track the implementation of the have clauses which negatively policy. State Law Office and impact on people with mental r) Amend mental health act to align to department of Justice health conditions, psychosocial, the constitution of Kenya, Health intellectual and cognitive Act, International laws and address disabilities. emerging issues. s) Decriminalize suicide and amend Kenya Law Reform other laws which are discriminatory Commission and use derogatory language. t) Amend law relating to criminal justice system to ensure people with mental health conditions are not Parliament discriminated by criminalization of symptoms of mental illness and get fair Judiciary administration of justice. u) Implement and enforce existing mental health related laws including
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,65,the Counsellors and Psychologists Act KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 45 j) Mental Health Act enacted 1989 v) Develop a Mental Health Action Ministry of Health requires amendment. Plan with prioritized resources to k) Other legislations were found to fast track the implementation of the have clauses which negatively policy. State Law Office and impact on people with mental w) Amend mental health act to align to department of Justice health conditions, psychosocial, the constitution of Kenya, Health intellectual and cognitive Act, International laws and address disabilities. emerging issues. x) Decriminalize suicide and amend Kenya Law Reform other laws which are discriminatory Commission and use derogatory language. y) Amend law relating to criminal justice system to ensure people with mental health conditions are not Parliament discriminated by criminalization of symptoms of mental illness and get fair Judiciary administration of justice. z) Implement and enforce existing mental health related laws including the Counsellors and Psychologists Act 46 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 l) Mental Health Act enacted 1989 a) Develop a Mental Health Action Ministry
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,66,of Health requires amendment. Plan with prioritized resources to m) Other legislations were found to fast track the implementation of the have clauses which negatively policy. State Law Office and impact on people with mental b) Amend mental health act to align to department of Justice health conditions, psychosocial, the constitution of Kenya, Health intellectual and cognitive Act, International laws and address disabilities. emerging issues. c) Decriminalize suicide and amend Kenya Law Reform other laws which are discriminatory Commission and use derogatory language. d) Amend law relating to criminal justice system to ensure people with Parliament mental health conditions are not discriminated by criminalization of symptoms of mental illness and get fair Judiciary administration of justice. e) Implement and enforce existing mental health related laws including the Counsellors and Psychologists Act KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 47 n) Mental Health Act enacted 1989 f) Develop a Mental Health Action Ministry of Health requires amendment. Plan with prioritized resources to o) Other legislations were found to fast track the implementation of the have clauses which negatively policy. State
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,67,Law Office and impact on people with mental g) Amend mental health act to align to department of Justice health conditions, psychosocial, the constitution of Kenya, Health intellectual and cognitive Act, International laws and address disabilities. emerging issues. h) Decriminalize suicide and amend Kenya Law Reform other laws which are discriminatory Commission and use derogatory language. i) Amend law relating to criminal justice system to ensure people with Parliament mental health conditions are not discriminated by criminalization of symptoms of mental illness and get fair Judiciary administration of justice. j) Implement and enforce existing mental health related laws including the Counsellors and Psychologists Act 48 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 7. Leadership and a) Lack of national and county a) Establish a Commission for Mental Ministry of Health Governance mental health leadership Health and Happiness. structures and systems left b) Establish the Directorate of Mental mental health unattended to. Health & Substance Use at the Ministry Ministry of Interior and b) The Kenya Board of Mental of Health. Coordination of Health was not constituted as c) Establish
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,68,mandatory requirement National provided for by the law for performance contracting by all Government Ministerial Departments and Agencies (MDAs) and counties to mainstream County Governments mental health programmes. d) Establish county mental health council and county mental health coordinators. NGO Council e) Establish sub county mental health focal point and ward mental health Ministry of ICT and committees. Youth f) Strengthen users and caregivers’ organizations and support groups. g) Promote leadership for youth peers’ Users and Caregivers groups lead interventions in mental health. Youth Organizations KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 49 8. Access to mental Mental health services are generally a) Decentralize and integrate mental health Commission on Mental health services not available to the population at services accessible by communities, Health and Happiness the county, and community levels. user friendly, people centred, recovery Where they existed, they are in oriented and with a human rights dehumanizing conditions, poor approach. Ministry of health infrastructure with inadequate b) Take urgent administrative measures to resources to deliver quality services. ensure availability of emergency drugs in mental health facilities c)
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,69,Mathari National Teaching & County Governments Referral Hospital to be gazetted and operationalized as a semi-autonomous Institute of Neuropsychiatry and Mental NGOs and Private Health sector d) Establish an affirmative action fund to train and recruit critical threshold Users and Caregivers of mental health professionals in accordance to the multidisciplinary Youth Organisations staff establishment at different levels of and service across sectors. Groups e) Support implementation of psychosocial rehabilitation and aftercare services. 50 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 9. Mental health a) Only 0.01% of the national a) Urgently reduce out of pocket payment Commission on Mental financing health budget is allocated to for mental health services by increasing Health and Happiness mental health public funding under Universal Health b) Kenyans have been forced into Care. poverty due to payment for b) Increase general government revenue to Parliament mental healthcare through out- closely match the international median of-pocket health financing of KES 250 per capita c) The recommended amount of per year. money that ought to be spent on c) Insurance healthcare financing by NHIF Ministry of
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,70,Health mental health is KES 150 per to provide comprehensive coverage of capita but Kenya is spending 15 outpatient and inpatient mental health cents care package. d) NHIF cover is not d) Amend Mental Health Act to provide National Treasury and comprehensive and private for mental health fund to address Planning insurance policies are disparities which will include revenue discriminatory raised from sin taxes to be managed by the commission on mental health and Kenya Revenue happiness. e) Tax incentives for organizations that Authority promote and support implementation of approved mental health programmes to service users and caregivers. NHIF KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 51 10. Mental health data a) The current health information a) Carry out a national mental health Commission on Mental and research system is inadequate in not survey to establish the burden, Health and Happiness addressing specific mental determinants and impact of mental ill health conditions health b) Inadequate research data on b) Additional funding to Mathari Ministry of Health, mental health in Kenya. hospital to build research capacity in mental health working
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,71,in Mathari Institute of collaboration with Mental Health and KEMRI and other partners Neuropsychiatry and KEMRI Universities and Research institutions 52 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 Annex 1: Strategic Actions towards strengthening Leadership and Governance for Mental Health Activities Output Indicators Baseline Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5 Budget Strengthening Mental Health planning at all levels National Mental health Plans and National Mental health Proportion of budgetary allocations fund National Budget is allocated to mental health fund County Mental health Plans and County Mental health Amount of County budgetary allocation plans Mental health Grants allocated to mental health programs KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 53 Mainstreaming Mental Health into the Healthcare systems and other Sectors Establish partnership coordination Mental Health ICC Functional Mental structures (Mental Health ICCs) established Health ICC Engage in joint annual planning with Annual work plans Proportion of partners on Mental Health at all levels developed Mental Health annual work plans with specified partner roles Integration Mental Health interventions 47 Counties Number of Counties into existing programs (e.g. HIV/AIDS, undertaking Mental in
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,72,which Mental NCDs, MNCAH etc.) Health integration Health interventions action in their have been into healthcare systems existing programs Integration Mental Health interventions Multisectoral Mental Proportion of in other sectors e.g., education, judiciary health programs Government MDAs etc. with Mental Health activities Mental Health Policies, legislation and Human rights Review and amend the Mental Health Act Current Mental Revised Mental to be in line with the constitution, Health Health Act reviewed Health Act Act 2017and other relevant legislations 54 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 Dissemination of the Mental Health Mental Health Number of counties policy/strategy to the Counties policy and strategy in which the Mental disseminated Health policy and strategy have been disseminated to Counties to appoint Mental health focal Mental Health Number of Counties persons focal person in 47 with Mental Health counties appointed focal persons Strengthening and empowerment of people with mental disorders and psychosocial disabilities and their organizations: Strengthening of User organizations and Strengthening and Number of Counties active participation in mental health roles empowerment User with Active User and responsibilities organizations Organizations KENYA
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,73,MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 55 ANNEX 2: Strategic Actions towards Promotive and Preventive Mental Health Activities Output Indicators Baseline Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5 Budget Establish at National and County Level a Functioning Functioning minimum of 2 Functioning multisectoral multisectoral mental programmes of mental health promotion and prevention health promotion multisectoral programmes. The programs will be and prevention mental health programmes formed by county mental health council promotion and comprehensive in collaboration with CSOs, private National program prevention in sector and other stakeholders for suicide existence (yes/no) Adopt WHO guidelines to develop and prevention in Kenya implement suicide prevention strategies Number of suicide deaths per year per 100,000 populations. To invest in the implementation of drug Strategic program County substance use prevention, treatment and care that improves use per capita protocols as a program guide. access The number of to effective health facilities substance use providing treatment prevention, and rehabilitation treatment, care and services rehabilitation. 56 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 Integrate mental health issues into the Mental health Number of schools existing school
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,74,health policies and school program programmes which activities have incorporated mental health promotion in schools Integrate Community mental health Community Family Community training in Community Health strategies/ mental health Programs family health programs program implementing integrated mental health programs Develop an integrated health & Workplace Mental Numbers of wellness program for the workplace in health promotion National and collaboration with the Ministry of public and wellness Counties with service/Occupational health & safety/ program Functional integrated health other stakeholders with mental health as & wellness an integral component program for the workplace -Develop an advocacy tool kit. Implement Number of advocacy measures awareness -Awareness and advocacy campaigns to at the community and advocacy reduce mental health disparities, stigma level as well as campaigns and among policy empower persons with MNS and makers. psychosocial disabilities KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 57 -Adopt adolescent package of care Targeted mental -Number of health (APOC) on provision of youth friendly health interventions care workers mental health services. for vulnerable providing sexual & groups such Reproductive health -Partner with the county council for
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,75,as children & services are trained persons with disabilities/ user & support adolescents, on mental health women, older groups to promote mental health in that persons, persons population. with disabilities, criminal -Work with the criminal justice system & justice system, -APOC adopted to Directorate of Prison Health Services to prisoners meet mental health integrate MNS in their health Services and people needs for the youth emerging from -Prevention, screening, treatment & -Number of persons conflicts & follow up of people emerging from the emerging from disasters conflict & disasters in collaboration conflict & disasters with RH/GBV program, public service & given mental health other stakeholders support -Train health care workers on integration of mental health in the provision of sexual & reproductive health services. Training of traditional practitioners, Integration religious and community leaders on of traditional mental health promotion, prevention & practitioners, advocacy. religious & community leaders into the mental health care and support system 58 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 ANNEX 3: Strategic Actions on Access to comprehensive Mental Healthcare Services at all Levels Activities Output
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,76,Indicators Baseline Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5 Budget Screening, early identification Bridge treatment 50% Screening of all and brief intervention of Mental Gap of MNS people seeking services Neurological and Substance use disorders through in the community (MNS) disorders and to refer for community and health units and appropriate care primary care primary care facility health facilities screening and brief intervention To conduct outreach activities in Community health 2 outreaches conducted the community including learning outreach services in a quarter institutions and other sectors. To manage MNS disorders as part Integrated mental All facilities in the of outpatient services including for health outpatient counties that have patients with chronic disease services clinics outpatient MNS services clinics To provide treatment and Substances use All facilities in the rehabilitative services for disorders treatment counties offering Substance use disorders and rehabilitative treatment and services units rehabilitative services for Substance use disorders KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 59 To initiate support groups to support care number of support families and caregivers to foster coordination groups initiated recovery and after care support
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,77,services and Secondary and tertiary health Child and Number of secondary facilities to avail Specialised adolescent and tertiary health user-friendly child and adolescent mental health facilities with user outpatient and inpatient mental services friendly CAMHS health services (CAMHS) To provide mental health and Integration of Integrating Psychosocial psychosocial support services mental health in interventions in chronic for patients with chronic the management disease clinics. diseases (communicable and of other chronic noncommunicable) as part of medical integrated health services) conditions To provide preceptorship level 5 Preceptorship Proportion of level 5 health facilities for training in mental health health facilities offering mental health training in training in mental health level 5 health facilities 60 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 Referral specialized mental health Targeted Number of targeted services in tertiary health facilities user-friendly specialized units in targeting different age cohorts and specialized tertiary health facilities special populations services (CAMH, Geriatrics, Addiction etc.) Training in psychiatry and mental Training in Number of mental health health in tertiary health facilities psychiatry and specialists trained mental health To facilitate research in mental
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,78,Mental health research work reviewed health through research review research by the Mental health committee informing policy Research review and practice committee To build capacity for the emergency To ensure that Proportion of response teams and develop people affected emergency response psychosocial support and mental by emergencies teams trained health management guidelines in have access to Psychosocial support emergency and trauma settings. mental health and mental health services at management guidelines the time of the disaster/ emergency KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 61 ANNEX 4: Strategic Actions on the strengthening of mental health systems: Activities Output Indicators Baseline Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5 Budget Healthcare Financing Increase funding for mental health More Financial Number of Counties services Resources for with Mental Health mental health Plan and Budgetary allocations Establish Community health Counties Number of financing programs to support Community Mental Counties with mental health through Public private Health Programs Community Mental partnerships and conditional grants Health Programs with financing from the National Government mechanisms Engaging sectors that have mental Mainstreaming Number of health components to make targeted
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,79,of Mental Health Ministries/Govt budgetary through agencies with Mental allocation to mental health services multisectoral/ Health and multi-disciplinary Services and programmes partnership and Programs collaboration Ensuring that the health insurance Healthcare Number of persons . system does not discriminate against financing of with mental persons with Mental, Neurological mental health disorders enrolled to and Substance use (MNS) disorders services NHIF in accessing insurance policies. 62 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 Workforce for mental health The mental health training shall be All HCWs are Number of Mental integrated in the training curricula of trained and Health Modules all health workers, which shall include competent to incorporated in the adequate content and time offered on provide primary curricula mental health training. Mental Healthcare services. To meet the current shortage of mental Bridge the gap Number of trained health workers, the following activities of mental health and certified shall be undertaken: workers health workers a) Provide in-service training for providing mental service providers on mental health healthcare services b) Provide a complete mental health team work force appropriate at all
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,80,levels of health care c) Support and finance the training of more mental health workers at national and county levels. d) Train community health workers on mental health e) Establish a regulatory framework for mental health professionals f) Strategic measures shall be put in place to train and recruit specialized mental health workers to work with special or vulnerable populations. KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 63 Develop a Public-Private-Partnership PPP Scholarship Public-Private (PPP) model and framework to programs Partnership facilitate the development of a supporting (PPP) model and competent mental health workforce training and framework human resources development of mental health workers Multidisciplinary and intersectoral Mainstreaming of Number of officers training in mental health (service mental health in trained in each providers in other sectors) other sectors sector Standardized training module on Mental Health for officers in other sectors (Police, Teachers, Prison Warders, Children officers, Human Resource Officers, Judicial officers and Prosecutors) Infrastructure for mental health Establish appropriate infrastructure for Health facilities Proportion of integrated community, outpatient and with designated Health facilities with designated inpatient comprehensive for
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,81,MNS and functional and functional infrastructure for infrastructure integrated and for mental health services. comprehensive (community, outpatient and inpatient) mental health services. 64 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 Develop a Centre of excellence in Provision of Level of completion Neuropsychiatry and Mental Health Specialized Mental of master plan Health Services, implementation Institute in Mathari NTRH training and research on Mental Health Six Regional specialized Centre of Decentralize Level of completion Excellence in treatment and care of specialized mental of regional centre MNS disorders in Meru, Mombasa, health services and infrastructure training in mental development Kakamega, Kisumu, Gilgil and Garissa health Establish special targeted users’ friendly Increased access to Number of Level clinics for vulnerable populations, mental healthcare 4 and 5 with child and adolescent, older persons and services for the designated and special populations Psychotrauma in level 4 and 5 hospitals functional user- friendly clinics for special populations Efficient logistics, information and Access of Number of communication technology facilities community mental counties with to enhance effective provision of health services mobile community through mobile community outreach mental
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,82,health mental health clinics or tele- services. (Vehicles, motorbikes, Mobile outreach services mental health phones, other ICT innovations) with/or using ICT innovation for community outreach KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 65 Health Products, Equipment and Technologies Supply of subsidized and cost effective, Access to Number of Essential psychotropic drugs and affordable and Counties with nonpharmaceutical materials in cost-effective budget line for Essential procurement and Assorted kits to the Primary, secondary medicines and stocking of variety and tertiary health facilities levels other health of subsidized products essential medicines and commodities Essential Neuropsychiatric; Use of diagnostic Number of counties neuropsychological and and therapeutic with procurement neurophysiologic diagnostic/therapeutic equipment and plans for stock in equipment and technology technologies in form of diagnostic treatment of MNS and therapeutic disorders equipment and technologies To review and increase the variety of Access to a variety Numbers of essential psychotropics medicines in the of essential atypical KEML list. psychotropics essential medicines psychotropic medicines in the KEML Mental health information systems and research Develop and disseminate a simplified Improve mental Number of counties mental health
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,83,reporting tools health data /health facilities and integrate it within the Health collection and reporting using Information System (HIS) management the integrated simplified mental health reporting tools 66 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 Capacity building programs for both Available Mental Number of health national and county health personnel on Health data workers trained the use and application of the simplified on collecting and through routine mental health reporting tools reporting of mental reporting of mental health indicators health indicators using DHIS2 Revise Mental health indicators Monitoring and Reports on mental for inclusion in the general health evaluation of health indicators information and reporting system mental health services Publish an annual status report Analysis of health Annual status sector performance report on Mental and guidance Health for planning and service improvement To establish a National Mental health National Institute The law research funding mechanism through of Mental Health establishing legislation National Institute of to regulate and Mental Health coordinate mental health information systems, training and research Do a national survey on Mental Health Baseline mental Mental health health
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,84,data survey report KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 67 Annex 5: Costing of Kenya Mental Health Action Plan 2021-2025 (Costs Estimates) Result area Broad Output Baseline 2021/ 2022/ 2023/ 2024/ 2025/ Unit 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 (2019/2020) 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 cost Kshs in Kshs Strengthening Implementation of 360,000 10M 15M 25M 30M 35M leadership and mental health policy at governance in the National level. mental health Implementation of the 0 15M 20M 25M 30M 35M mental health policy at the County level (office of mental health focal point) Mainstreaming of 0 5M 10M 10M 15M 20M mental health in other Sectors through establishment of workplace mental health and wellness programs Establishment of user’s 0 5M 10M 10M 15M 20M organisations and support groups. Mental health Promotive and - 50M 50M 70M 75M 75M services preventive programs: 68 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 delivery Community mental (Preventive health (Education, & Promotive Screening and care programs and coordination) Primary to Tertiary care) Promotive and - 5M 10M 10M 15M 20M preventive programs: and
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,85,School mental health Infrastructural (National) development Promotive and - 10M 15M 20M 25M 25M preventive programs: Suicide prevention program (National) Promotive and - 15M 20M 25M 25M 30M preventive programs: Substance use disorders prevention program (National) Primary mental - 2M 3M 4M 5 M 6 M healthcare services: functional Outpatient mental health clinics Secondary care level 14 5 7 7 8 6 20M mental health services: Mental Units Units Units Units Units functional County health mental health unit per units 100M 140 M 140M 160 M 120 M County KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 69 Specialized 114,000 250,000 300,000 350,000 400,000 450,000 care level: (Mathari Restructuring and improvement of Mathari 200M 200M 200M 200 M hospital. 200 No M 200M Five regional regional specialized tertiary centres of facilities excellence. Human Training of - 100 200 300 400 500 10,000 resources community CHVs development health volunteers on and 1M 2M 3M 4M 5M mental health management Training of - 100 200 300 400 500 15,000 Primary care provid providers on ers mental health Gap 1.5M 3M 4.5M 6M
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,86,7.5M intervention programme (mhGAP) Training of baseline specialised mental health professionals (National and County levels) -Psychiatrists 20 (3.5 30 40 50 60 500000 -Mental health nurses 215(18 300 350 400 450 250000 70 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 -Psychologists 50 (7.5 75 100 150 200 300000 (Clinical/medical) -HD in Addiction 30 (2.3 50 35 50 60 150000 science and management -Medical social workers 25 (1.9 40 70 90 120 150000 -Clinical Medicine HD Psychiatry & Mental 10 (1 20 45 60 80 180000 health -Occupational therapists 10 (1 10 30 40 50 150000 Mental health training - 100 150 200 300 400 15000 for service providers in Providers other sectors 1.5M 3M 6M 7.5 12M Training of service - 100 150 200 300 400 15000 providers in mental Providers health and psychosocial 1.5M support in emergency and humanitarian 3M 6M 7.5M 12M settings. KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 71 Develop and incorporate - 2 3 4 mental health modules in curricula - - the training curricula of 600000 900000 1.2 health workers. Recruitment of
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,87,specialized mental health professionals: -Psychiatrists 20 (60 30 40 50 60 -Mental health nurses 250 300 350 400 450 (250 -Psychologists (Clinical/medical/ 50 (50 80 100 150 200 Counselling) 30 (23 -Medical social workers 25 35 50 60 30 (30 -Clinical Medicine HD 40 45 60 80 Psychiatry & Mental health 10 (7.5 -Occupational therapists 20 30 40 50 Information mental National mental health - 200M - - - - health survey 72 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 system and research Monitoring and Evaluation of - 50M 60M 70M 75M 80M mental health indicators Annual Mental health conference - 10M 15M 20M 25M 30M Medical products, Access of essential psychotropic baseline 500M 450 400 400 350 equipment and medicines at National referral technologies hospitals Access of essential psychotropic baseline 100M 150 200 200 250 medicines budget County Health facilities Supply of diagnostic and baseline 100M 150M 150 - - therapeutic equipment Supply of logistics and ICT baseline 100M 150 200 - - technologies to facilitate mental health services Mental healthcare Community mental healthcare - 141 235 235
kenya_mental_health_action_plan__2021-2025_.pdf,88,235 235 Financing financing funding Enrolment to NHIF for persons baseline - - - - with mental health conditions KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 73 Mental health Implementation Multisectoral and vulnerable of guidelines, budgets with population. screening tools annual 10% and user- increments friendly care and support targeted program Advocacy and Implement Multisectoral partnership for Quality Rights budgets with stigma reduction mental health annual 10% and user’s initiative. increments empowerment. Anti-stigma Multisectoral campaign budgets with annual 10% increments Social Monitoring and Multisectoral determinants of evaluation of budgets with mental Health. mental health annual 10% determinants increments and report on happiness index Family affairs Multisectoral and budgets with social protection annual 10% programs increments Total 1,844,000,000 2,309,900,000 2,763,900,000 2,466,050,000 2,663,100,000 74 KENYA MENTAL HEALTH ACTION PLAN 2021 - 2025 MINISTRY OF HEALTH
